---
author: Tim
layout: post
title: Get your lab on twitter!
summary: blog
type: essay
chapo: Scientists and institutions should care (a lot) about social networks.
tags:
- scientific communication
- social networks
---

More and more scientists are taking advantage of social networking tools to talk about their research. This trend was even deemed worthy of [a paper in
*Nature* this week](http://www.nature.com/naturejobs/science/articles/10.1038/nj7371-141a). I've read this paper, and I had mixed feelings about it. On one hand, it was good to see the use of social medias showcased in such a prestigious journal. On the other hand, I felt it came out of nowhere, and was too descriptive. I was left wondering, if I were not already using twitter and other similar things (partly) for scientific purposes, would this article have changed my habits? Maybe not.

However, there are a number of different reasons for which getting involved in
social networks is a wise decision for a researcher or a lab, and I will
highlight those who seem the most relevant. Obviously, social media presence
goes beyond having a twitter account. This is why, at
[INNGE](http://twitter.com/#!/INNGEcologist) and the [French Ecological
Society](http://www.sfecologie.org/), we have a facebook page. This is why my
former group has a blog to talk about the new papers, and this is also why I
have a blog. Taken all together, these tools offer an incredible potential for
scientists to engage in the discussion, and we should all work actively to use
them.

# Cut the middle man

It's often tempting to complain about the fact that Science (not the journal,
the discipline) is hard to spread from within the community to a broader
audience. Short of some really stunning results, which may or may not be
stunning science but are appealing in terms of communication, the general
public is left relatively uninformed about what happens in the labs. The
reason is simple: channel through which we can communicate scientific
informations are relatively few, and it can be tedious to write a press
release. Or to talk with journalists, which [may be tempted to slightly
arrange your sayings](http://cscs.umich.edu/~crshalizi/weblog/838.html), due
to a mis-understanding of the subject, or the necessity to fit some editorial
format.

Using social media will effectively result in the elimination of the middle man. Scientists can be in charge of their communication, and reach out to the greatest audience available. The part about being in charge is especially important: in a few clicks, you can have a [wordpress](http://wordpress.com/) or a facebook page up and running, and _you_, the researcher, will be able to talk directly about your work. This will require a short time of adaptation, as the general tone of a blog post is not one of a paper (unless I'm wrong either in the way I write papers or blog posts!), and the degree of precision differs. But once this is done, you may even find the exercise enjoyable!

# Help your ideas invade

Probably the best advice I received about what science is about comes from one of my collaborators, who interrupted our burger-seeking walk to tell me that ideas are like populations, and if I want to be a good researcher, I have to make my ideas invade the resident community. Shortly thereafter, we found a burger place, which only makes the memory more enjoyable. Invasion is about two things. Either you have a high fitness, or you [benefit of an Allee effect](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Allee_effect). Being present on social networks will help you achieve the later.

For this reason, we owe journals like _[Ecology Letters](http://api.twitter.com/#!/ecologyletters)_ or _[Methods in Ecology & Evolution](http://twitter.com/#!/methodsecolevol)_ a big thank you, because they mention every new paper on twitter (well, that, and they've also accepted papers of mine, so you know...). Some papers get retweeted, and benefit from a terrific, instantaneous exposure. I've seen a few instances of one of the authors getting involved in the discussion, and it was all very stimulating.

I'm not aware of any studies establishing a correlation (or the lack thereof) between the number of times a paper is mentioned on social networks and its number of citations (my guess is that it will help citations happen sooner, not necessarily increase them – although good papers may be retweeted more frequently, so there are confounding effects here). But it definitely will not harm you to see a lot of people talking about your work.

> **Update on Jan. 21, 2012** — I became aware of this [blog piece at BMJ Web Development](http://blogs.bmj.com/bmj-journals-development-blog/2012/01/06/twimpact-factors-can-tweets-really-predict-citations/), with a link to a paper showing that the number of tweet is a fairly good predictor of the number of citations. [Here you, go, now](http://twitter.com/signup).

# The permanent conference

A while ago during a discussion about social media, someone mentioned to me
that the kind of interactions established on twitter resemble the ones
established during a conference, albeit soberer. I have to agree with this.
Just look at the incoming tweets, or facebook updates, and you'll see what
everybody is up to. What they write about on their blogs. What kind of
webpages they are reading.

It's not necessarily about science, and you'll probably find yourself bonding
with people, which may at some point become collaborators. This is one of the
strongest points to me, the ability to be permanently in touch with your
community. Even though it's not always productive, it's always good fun. But
it can become very interesting. You can ask for advice. You can get feedback,
ideas, suggestions. And a lot of things which would have gone completely under
your radar suddenly become accessible to you. Just for this, it is definitely
worth the few minutes a day that you'll soon find yourself putting into the
exercise.

# All the cool kids do it!

I've tried to make the point that being active on social networks can help you
take control of what is said about your science, will let other spread your
ideas, and will make you feel as if you were in contact with everyone at once.
But more importantly, it's cool. Wicked cool. Hype.

Basically, it will give you two things. Visibility, and the image of an
engaging researcher / group of people. Students will actually look for these
traits, so being easy to reach may attract people to your lab. It's also why
you should not use Word to do your lab webpage (unless you are so good and
attractive and awesome that it stops mattering), by the way.

And the best part is, it's free (as in beer)! And should you want to get
started, I'm sure you'll find plenty of people willing to help you, and set
things up for you, and introduce you to these tools. I'm confident that they
will become an increasingly important part of the daily routine of scientists
in the near future (which is why we use them so much at INNGE), so don't miss
up this opportunity.

