---
title: Network structure of obligate and facultative parasites
author: Tim
type: paper
layout: post
tags:
- ecological networks
- parasites
---

We have a new paper [online at *Parasitology*][paper], on the differences of
the structure between rodents hosts, and their obligates of facultatives
parasites. We had data from a really cool rodents-ectoparasites system, in
which the same hosts have both facultative and obligate parasites. These data
were also collected in different locations, and at different times.

There are two important things in the results. First, the networks of obligate
and facultative parasites look *nothing* alike. One (obligate) is highly
modular and anti-nested, and the other (facultative) is highly nested but not
particularly more or less modular. But when you look at all types of parasites
together, the resulting networks are both more moudular *and* more nested than
expected by chance. The take-home of this particular result is: "parasitism" is
a vague notion, and we should not be too surprized when lumping contrasted
ecological strategies makes weird results emerge (also, we should focus on how
different functional groups affect network properties).

The second part of the result is most likely more appealling to
parasitologists: we show that the networks of obligate parasites vary less in
space and time that the network of facultative ones. Not too suprising when you
think about it long enough: facultative parasites are mostly opportunisitc, and
thus they will probably pick their hosts more randomly (without less
constraints) than obligate ones. There's also the fact that facultative
parasites tend to occupy sites within the hosts that require less stringent
adaptations. But the key message is still the same: when we lump different
classes of organisms together in a single network, it's important to quantify
how much each contribute to the overall properties.

[paper]: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0031182013000851
